---
title: Course/A1/New letters - Þ, Ð
vocabulary:
---

1.

Many [[Alphabet|Icelandic letters]] have diacritics, but these two letters are especially unfamiliar:

The letter '''[[Ð]]'''[[ð|/'''ð''']] is a ''d'' with a stroke. You can think of it as a very soft ''d'' or a soft ''th''. It can either sound like the English ''bro'''th'''er'', but it can also sound like the English ''bro'''th'''''. Sometimes this letter is so soft that it disappears, like a ghost.<blockquote>`bróðir, veður, glaður, garður, brauð`</blockquote>The letter '''[[Þ]]'''[[þ|/'''þ''']], despite its looks, is not related to the letter ''P''. It usually has a strong ''th'' sound like the English '''''th'''ick'', but it can sometimes be soft like the ''ð'' letter above and sound like the English ''bro'''th'''er''. <blockquote>`þúsund, þykk`</blockquote>The difference between ð and þ is that you use your voice to say ð, like you do in brother. You can feel for yourself by putting your fingers against your throat! Now say 'brother'. Can you feel it vibrate? When you say 'thick', your throat doesn't vibrate, because it is a 'voiceless' letter.

2.

There are also a few letters that might look familiar but are pronounced differently than in English.

The letter Æ/æ is pronounced like 'ay' as in 'Aye, aye, captain!'

'hæ, læra, ætla'

The letter Ö/ö is (more or less) pronounced like the 'e' in 'maker' or 'later'.

'föstudagur, tvö, mjög'

It is also used for writing that sound when you don't know what to say: 'Ööööö... next question.' So it's definitely an essential letter to learn!

3.

Icelandic vowels can also have an accent, the ´, which changes the sound. Compare:

A (as in 'father') and Á (as in 'ouch!')

'magur, mágur'

E (as in 'let, bed') and É (as in 'YEs' - with that y-sound!)

'retta, rétta'

I (as in 'win') and Í (as in 'sleep')

'liða, líða'

O (as in 'god') and Ó (as in 'load')

'goði, góður'

U (as in '??') and Ú (as in 'shoot')

'kunni, kúnni'

Y (as in 'win') and Ý (as in 'sleep') (that's right, it's pronounced exactly like i and í!)

'lysta, lýsa'

4.

Finally, you can combine vowels to make new sounds! (Like we needed yet more of them!)

E and I make 'EI' which is pronounced like 'way' or 'day'. (Same with E and Y)

'Leita, veit, alein'

A and U make 'AU'; that sound doesn't really exist in English but try imagining an extremely posh Brit saying the 'O' in 'Obama' or 'Oh, dear'

'brauð, laukur, gaur'

Dizzy, yet? Time for a little exercise!

5.

Icelandic has some loanwords from other languages. Now that you know how to pronounce the Icelandic letters, can you guess what they mean?

Kreisí

Plís

Kaþarsis

Þema

Deit

Fríkí

Sjitt

Núðlur

Ómægat

Bóhem

