---
title: Þ
tags:
- Pronunciation
license: CC0
reviewed: no
---

The letter '''Þ''' is known as "þorn" (thorn). It makes the same sound as the English ''“'''th'''ick”'' or ''“'''th'''under”''.<note>It's almost the same sound, but while in English the tongue sticks out of the mouth, in Icelandic the tongue only touches the back of the front teeth.</note>

*'''þ'''annig, '''þ'''ú, '''þ'''áttur, '''þ'''rír

## Softer sound in common words
Common words that start with Þ have a tendency to be pronounced much softer, making the Þ letter sound like like [[Ð]], [[H]], or even disappearing completely. See the article [[Disappearing sounds#Thorn|''Disappearing sounds § Þorn'']] for a further explanation.

This only happens to common words such as ''það'', ''þetta'', ''þeir'', ''þarna'', and only when they are [[Stress|not stressed]].

*Þ will occasionally sound like a [[Ð]]:
**Er það gott? {{pron|er ða gott}}
*Þ will occasionally sound like an [[H]]:
**Er það þessi? {{pron|er ða hessi}}
**Þetta er flott. {{pron|hett er flott}}
*Þ will occasionally completely disappear:
**Hvað er þetta? {{pron|kva er etta}}

***

The letter Þ is unrelated to the letter [[P]], instead it comes from [[w:thorn (rune)|an old runic letter]]. Þ is not used in languages other than Icelandic today.

Remember that this letter is [[Transcription|transcribed]] as "'''th'''" in situations where you don't have access to an Icelandic keyboard or if you're using English-only letters for a URL. The word "þangað" is transcribed as "thangad" and ''<u>not</u>'' as "pangad". Icelanders are able to fully understand you if you write "th" because they are used to it.

